---
title: Case study
---

# Introduction

When you apply for a job online, your resume usually doesn’t go straight to a human being. Instead, it passes through an automated system designed to filter, rank, and sort candidates before a recruiter ever sees a name. These systems are called Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS).

This case study will examine how these systems may make biased decisions with the help of AI, including what inputs they receive, and what might make them favor one applicant over another.

ATS systems take in a large number of resumes, and determine if the applicants are eligible for the jobs they are applying to, often with the help of AI. But in practice, the results are often biased.

One such example is Amazon’s AI hiring tool. Built in 2014, it aimed at mechanizing the search for top talent by automatically reviewing job applicants’ resumes. By 2015, they realized that the hiring tool is biased against women (Dastin, 2018).

# Inputs

Many organizations and companies, such as Amazon, use ATS systems. The primary system that Amazon uses for recruiting corporate employees is ICIMS. ICIMS analyzes a candidate's resume, application information, and existing employee records. Furthermore, the TARAI index illustrates how HireVue is the primary company that uses ATS to analyze an applicant's profiling and background checks. The TARAI index explains how the AI works. HireVue collects data from an applicant's interview video, job scenario tests, and language skills tests. The ATS analyzes the applicant on 3 assumptions. First, the applicant's language and behavior in the interview video are analyzed to see how the candidate reflects the values of the organization. Second, the ATS system utilizes historical data to set a benchmark. Third, the product's language tools effectively analyze a candidate's speech even with accents (Simpson et al, 2025). It is not specified what historical data the organization uses to set benchmarks for future candidates. Candidates are analyzed based on past and current employees' skills and performance, and ATS finds matches based on the resume, employment history, and a series of online assessments to recruit future candidates. So, top performing employees can be set as benchmarks and the ATS will look for candidates with similar skills and background. In the article, The Impossibility of Fairness: Different Value Systems Require Different Mechanisms For Fair Decision Making. Sorrelle explains, “It is common in data science to directly use any observed data that is avail-able; doing so without modification or further evaluation is an adoption of the WYSIWYG worldview and assumption.” (Sorrelle et al, 2021). This means that every time ATS evaluates someone's resume, it  uses historical data as benchmarks without realizing that the data is free from any bias. With ATS there's a high risk that it can commit recurring mistakes that can impact future hiring decisions, especially by disadvantageous candidates that come from forms that were historically underrepresented in the data.

# Outputs

---

To learn about how the system might see a resume from a man and a woman, click on the links below!

<div class="boxes">
	<a href="/204/f/">Apply as a woman!</a>
	<a href="/204/m/">Apply as a man!</a>
</div>
